---
permalink: /
title: ""
excerpt: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---
I lead the Western Engineering for Spine and Trauma (WEST) lab is located at Victoria Hospital, in London, Ontario, Canada as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering (MME), Faculty of Engineering at University of Western Ontario (UWO). I also hold the position of Endowed Chair in Spine and Trauma Biomechanics. 

Our work is focused on biomechanics and load transfer through bones, particularly in broken bones. Clinically, broken bones are called "fractures". I study bone as a material, bone fractures, and bone healing after injury. We work very closely with the team of 100 trauma and spine surgeons from the [Department of Orthopedic Surgery](https://www.schulich.uwo.ca/surgery//divisions/orthopaedic_surgery.html) at the Schulich School of Dentistry and Medicine at the UWO, using engineering methods and tools to study bone biomechanics. Our current work focuses on measuring bone healing (capacity and amount), and we are also working on developing new surgical implants to improve healing of fractured bones. Our central goal as a research group is to improve our understanding of bones after fracture, and to improve clinical diagnosis and treatment and improve patient fracture care.

I read a DPhil from The University of Oxford. I completed my Postdoctoral Research training in the Edinburgh Orthopaedic Engineering Collaborative, before obtaining my independent academic fellowship at The University of Edinburgh focused on developing monitoring tools for bone fracture healing. I am a co-inventor of a novel orthopaedic technology (bone implant) for children sufferring from coronal plane angular deformities of the lower limb e.g. genu varum & genu valgum, as well as a wrist arthrodesis implant for fixed flexion deformity in Cerebral Palsy patients (The University of Sydney, Australia). I have also worked on improving existing orthopaedic technology, including the [Oxford Knee implant](https://www.zimmerbiomet.com/en/products-and-solutions/specialties/knee/oxford-partial-knee.html) (Oxford University, UK), and developing ultrasonic bone cutting tools (University of Edinburgh, Scotland). I have also travelled to orthopaedic research labs across the US (University of Denver, Colorado Joint Replacement, University of Pennsylvania, Drexel University, Hospital for Special Surgery (NY), Northeastern University in Boston and University of Ottawa in Canada) as a BORS/BJR travelling fellow.

Having studied and worked around the world, I endeavour to support trainees in my lab to dream big, work hard and achieve great engineering feats. Big dreams are achievable, they just require the insight to break them into solvable and achievable tasks, determination, hard work and persistence.  Students working in my lab will gain in-depth knowledge about bone tissue, invaluable sound technical engineering skills including 3D computer-aided design (CAD) modelling, integrated real-time position tracking, 3D prototyping (3D printing), finite element analysis (FEA) and Python coding. Trainees will also gain exposure to a patient care environment, learn how to work in a team and develop invaluable strong personal, interdisciplinary communication skills (oral & written) by interacting closely with orthopedic surgeons, academic peers and scientists. We will work as a team, to advance orthopedic care.
