---
title: 'How to handle personal hardship during your studies'
date: 2023-12-07
permalink: /posts/2023/12/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - personal hardship
  - PhD studies
  - academic advice
---

Hardships during your studies are not necessarily inevitable, but they are possible... anything (for the better or worse) is possible. When I had just commenced my second year of my PhD at the University of Oxford, the COVID19 pandemic hit. I remember feeling distressed reading the daily news updates as the virus quickly spread and by April 2020, I had just received an opportunity to go to travel on an all expenses paid trip to Japan to teach English. Here is an email from one of the organisers at the time on the 27th April 2020 about the program:
Dear all,
[…]. We hope you are keeping well and adjusting to lockdown life during this unusual period.
Thank you very much to all of you who replied regarding participation in the proposed Summer Empowerment Programme. Unfortunately, we have now received confirmation that the Summer Empowerment Programme will not be going ahead, due to the ongoing uncertainties surrounding Covid 19 and international travel.
Furthermore, it had became clear as the weeks progressed that the epidemic was spreading alarmingly rapidly and the World Health Organisation (WHO) had declared a pandemic by the 12th March 2020. On the 23rd of March 2020, Prime Minister of Britain made the first national announcement of a national lockdown. Our lives changed overnight, none of us had any idea what we were to be expecting in the future, my vibrant six bedroom student house on St Cross Street came to a standstill, with all of my housemates fleeing to their homes in different regions in the UK in between awkward farewells and many “I will see you … soon?”. I remember thinking that my world could not become more unpredictable, scary and isolated. However, things slowly eased into a new routine: I began working from home, my team continued with all of the same meetings, just fortnightly and my PhD, which seemed like it would suffer, was salvaged and cultivated and nursed back into a healthy and flourishing project.
However, in September 2020, just before my birthday, my parents had phoned me on the 5th of September in a fluster. My mum had fallen ill with a bad stomach ache, and my dad was worried about taking her to the doctors given the pandemic and how hospitals had become seen as places of covid concentration. Dad and mum had agreed to go to the pharmacy first where the pharmacist had recommended medication for the treatment of Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS). My mum had never had IBS, and no reason for us to suspect IBS. On further reading, the symptoms also didn’t match my mum’s symptoms. I barely celebrated my birthday, so it passed, as I was growing increasingly concerned about my mum’s stomach pain which seemed persistent. By the 10th of September, we had decided that it was time for my mum to go to the doctors, despite the threat of the virus. Everything after that point happened so quickly, a routine appointment at the GPs led her to be on a drip as she was completely dehydrated. They had discovered a mass in her bowels during assessment and she was sent for further investigation. She was diagnosed with stage IIIc bowel cancer. By the 11th of September, she was admitted to emergency surgery for a hemicolectomy, which she had to face alone due to the covid restriction on visitor policy so dad could only visit at restricted times and for a very limited period. It was in this time when she was being seen to by the medical team that I would call her and send her messages to try and cheer her up. I had just started dating Russell and I had not told my parents about our relationship. Russell decided to make my parents a powerpoint presentation about himself to introduce himself to my parents, and also in hopes that this news would make my mum happier. The presentation worked, mum was happy but overall, mum was a trooper, she kept strong this whole period, while it felt like my world had come to even more of a standstill. I was doing my PhD work in the day, up all hours of the night translating documents and liaising with doctors, keeping track of the finances, consoling myself, my sister and my family. By the end of September, I had run my tank completely dry – I was functioning but deeply unhappy. I realized that I needed to get in contact with my Director of Graduate Studies to receive some guidance and advice.

I was advised to suspend my studies. I never told my parents this – for her and my dad to know that I had paused my studies for them would have been an added burden for them. My partner and I researched quotes for my flights, covid tests, and quarantine and applied for hardship funding to cover all the cost. I applied for an emergency visa from the Chinese embassy in London, booked myself onto the very last flight out of the UK to China on the 13th December, completed a £450 covid fit to fly test, IgG and IgM antibody tests, two weeks of quarantine in Shanghai (including relocation via ambulance on my second quarantine day to an intense facility for at risk covid people due to the passenger in front of me testing positive for covid). Here I was sent three meals a day and tested for covid each morning. During my Shanghai quarantine, I submitted my first academic paper to a journal and completed the first batch of my experiments. After two weeks had passed, I travelled to my home town to undergo an at home quarantine on reaching my parents house for another week, supervised via video camera by the local authorities, which meant that both my parents had to vacate to my grandfather’s home for the week. 

I finally got to see my mum on the 7th of January 2021. She was frail. Her weakness broke my heart but I was finally home and grateful to have the opportunity to give her and my dad a hug and some much needed support. While my parents are both originally from China, they had immigrated to South Africa just before I was born so they had not been back for 30 years. In that large spanse of time, China had transformed into a prosperous country, quite different to how they had remembered it to be, so for the next eight months, we navigated life in China as foreigners together. My dad would escort my mum through copious amounts of hospital visits, chemo trips and mum would return fortnightly knocked straight back from the medication and feeling nauseas. I stayed home and cooked food, tried to keep the mood light, suggested that my mum buy a wig and pushed on with my PhD studies. I passed my confirmation of status over a zoom call in China. I conducted multiple job interviews and wrote my first book chapter during this time. My favourite meeting was during the Chinese New Year celebration – it was my first CNY festival so my family were happy and cooking meals together but given the time difference, I had all my work meetings in the evening. On this particular evening, we had tried to meet but fireworks kept being set off in the background but we managed and I was grateful for the patience of my supervisors. Finally, in August 2021, I decided that my mum was doing well and stable enough and it was growing more urgent that I return to the UK as the UK lockdown had lifted and society was largely moving back offline, so requesting online meetings to complete my PhD was no longer feasible. On returning, I suffered from noise anxiety, struggles with being ok with covid given that I was living in China where the restrictions due to covid and penalties around covid infections were still harsh. I was also really worried about people asking me many questions about my prolonged absence and learned then that practicing a response beforehand could remove at least some of the anxiety: “I have been visiting my family during the pandemic”. After completing the final bits of my research work, in December I entered an intense two weeks where I disappeared into my bedroom where I did nothing but write my thesis. My supervisor felt that once chapter in particular needed a lot of work, so I kept re-writing it until I felt that it read a little better. Finally, I submitted my thesis on the 15th January 2022. I completed my viva on the 22nd March 2022, and on the 25th of March, I started my new job as a postdoctoral research fellow and moved to Edinburgh in Scotland. All the while, my mum was doing much better, she had taken up dancing, made new friends at the local church and while she was never clear of a cancer, she tried her best to live the best life that she could. In November of that year, my sister gave birth to her second born, a boy, named Hunter.

My career was taking off, I had tried submitting many applications (the majority of which failed) but I did receive a prestigious travelling fellowship, where I had the opportunity to travel around the world and see orthopaedic research labs throughout North America and Canada. There was something for me to learn here – try or you will not have the chance to potentially succeed. In this time, my mothers health had declined, and I considered pulling out of the fellowship, however, my mother told me confidently, that I should definitely not quit this incredible opportunity for her, and reassured me that she would be fine. Her first operation had resulted in adhesions (likely in 80% of patients who receive bowel surgery) and the adhesions were causing blockages in her bowels and her symptoms from 2022 were returning. We decided as a family to go ahead with surgery as other attempts to alleviate the pain were no longer working. I was presenting my work in the day and calling my mum at night. Seeing her helpless in a hospital bed broke me. I couldn’t keep this up so during the trip, I applied for a visa to return to China. I was to be joined by my whole family, except Russell, because the borders in China were still closed to foreigners due to covid restrictions on travel. I returned back to Edinburgh for just a few days. One of the days, Russell took me out to St Margaret’s Loch in Edinburgh where he got down on one knee and asked me to marry him. I was so overwhelmed, with worry (did my family know) etc. and finally joy when I realized that all had already been taken care of. He had decided to propose slightly earlier than he wanted to plan, because he was concerned about my mum’s health and wanted her approval while she was still able. I did not like to think about my mum’s eminent death and in fact at this point, she had proven to be so resilient and so strong, that I had just started to shift my mindset from “mum is dying” to “mum is living with a terrible chronic condition that we have to learn to manage”. Given Hunter’s birth, my mum’s decline in health and my engagement, we decided to meet as a family in March. Thus began the best month of my life, with good memories – we arrived concerned, but realized quickly that mum was actually in considerably good health. She had a stoma and that was a big new thing but we were managing, or rather I should say that my dad was managing everything. We enjoyed our time together, argued about silly things, ate meals together, and attended my cousin Margaret’s wedding. Mum was “back to normal”.

While I wanted to remain in China longer, my PhD graduation ceremony was long booked in and while we had as a family originally planned for my parents to come and visit Oxford and the UK and to attend my graduation, that was not possible with my mum’s frail condition. Instead, my best friend, Ayesha and her husband, Johnny, flew all the way from the USA to join Russell in being my family. At graduation, the vice chancellor (who clearly didn’t speak Latin but had to conduct the entire ceremony in Latin), did stress that the success of a DPhil in Oxford is not without the support of our family and friends – that one hit home. My family took lots of photos, my parents streamed in from China to watch me graduate and I overall had a lovely day ending on a really nice meal with some of my closest friends. Soon after my graduation, mum’s health declined again. I called often, weighing in on decisions, translating and seeking UK clinical guidance for recurrent adhesions. However, as time went on, my mother’s condition only worsened. I finally asked my boss if I could perhaps go to China again. It was a Tuesday and he had just given me permission to go but also told me that the condition does not sound promising. He prepared me for some bad news, and told me that while there is nothing that I can do for my mum, I can focus on supporting my dad. My mum passed away that Sunday. She gasped for air like fish do when they are taken out of water. I told her that I loved her and I think she heard that. 

I just passed my interview for a tenure track assistant professor role at Western University in Canada. It was an intense three day interview process that was grueling but also oddly enjoyable. While I was delighted, I was also exhausted but a big part of me was also sad. Sad because in these moments, usually the first thing we do is call our loved ones to let them know the good news. Of course, I still have my lovely father, my sister, aunt, uncle, brother in law, niece, nephew, cousins, and grandfather but a piece of home was missing. We live our lives for these moments to make our parents proud, particularly immigrant parents, who themselves have given up and sacrificed so much for us to have but just a chance at a better life. I know my living family are alive and so proud of my achievements, and I hope that wherever my mum is, that she knows that I have and will continue to work hard, just as she had trained me to do as a little child. My ambition and drive are all due to my parents, who believed in me every step along the way. 

So, back to the original impetus for this article: to overcome hardship during your studies can be no easy feat, depending on the circumstances. However, anything is possible, even overcoming the most challenging situations. You will need to face many challenges and hurdles with a razor sharp focus, an immense amount of work, ability to ask for help when you need it, working with your team, showing resilience, perseverance, hard work and gratitude and appreciation. While we are born to be resilient and to adapt, raised to be good respectable people with an honest heart and good morals, your time at university is meant to teach you not just technical skills, but also help you to harness and cultivate the interpersonal skills and communication skills necessary to allow you to grow into a leader, and to lead your own successful life beyond your studies. So go on and embark on your degree with the goal to learn with an open mind, the confidence to try despite the threat of failure, the courage to overcome hardships and failures and the resilience to see it through to the end. Learn to repeat these skills over and over again, because that is the difference between a degree, and your life. You got this!
